# In-Person Meetings

It's remarkable, given all of the scientific innovations that have occurred during the past century, that scientists continue to rely on a relatively limited range of communication tools when they gather together in person. Despite some signs of recent change, the majority of scientific workshops rely almost entirely on presentations as a mode of communication. Presentations involve the one-way transfer of information from a speaker to an audience of passive listeners. While presentations do have a place in scientific communcation, serving primarily to convey new knowledge that will be of interest to a broad community, they are largely ineffective when it comes to building and maintaining team collaborations. We feel that presentations should be one of a broad spectrum of tools available to researchers when they gather together in person. Below we list a series of additional structures that we have experimented with in structuring in-person workshops.

## Meeting Design

Planning for an in-person meeting should begin several months in advance of the event. We recommend assembling a small *design team* composed of several investigators who volunteer to assist in defining the purpose and structure of the workshop. Together with the science team lead, project manager and team facilitator, the group will design the workshop over a series of planning calls in the months prior to the event. The first planning call should focus on defining the overall purpose of calling the meeting. For example, a meeting focused on initial stages of team building for collaboration will have a different structure and design than one aimed at synthesizing new research findings. At a minimum, the overall layout of the workshop should be captured in a standard meeting agenda, but a better approach is to build a [design story board](http://www.liberatingstructures.com/21-design-storyboards/) that explicitly lists the purpose, content and structure of each activity ([here](files/HiMATWorkshopDay1Storyboard.pdf) is a sample storyboard from our first HiMAT workshop). 

Below we list many of the common reasons for gathering researchers together in person and provide recommended structures that maximize the liklihood for positive outcomes. We draw on past experience, trial and error and a collection of excellent facilitation tools called [Liberating Structures](http://www.liberatingstructures.com/). We recognize that some of the approaches listed here are new ways of interacting, and should therefore be presented as something that is invitational rather than required. At the same time we want to emphasize that these structures are designed to unleash the creativity of all team members, both introvers and extroverts alike.

### Getting connected

In person meetings provide a unique opportunity to connect with our colleagues on a human level, without the barriers of remote technologies. We believe that all workshops should begin with opportunities for connection in ways that transcend our typical scientific conversations. Additionally, workshops early in the project lifespan should dedicate more time in the schedule to activites that build relationships of trust, whereas later in the project these can be reduced (but not eliminated!) as people get to know each other better.

Our basic strategy for facilitating team connections is to invite people into small group conversations guided by a simple and clear prompt. We often use [Impromptu Networking](http://www.liberatingstructures.com/2-impromptu-networking/) or [1-2-4-All](http://www.liberatingstructures.com/1-1-2-4-all/) with an invitation like "What is one success in your life recently that you wish to share?" or "What do you hope to achive during this workshop?". For a more lively exchange we use [Mad Tea](http://www.liberatingstructures.com/mad-tea/) and include prompts such as "I know a team is functioning well when..." and "One skill I would like to improve on is...". 


### Creating a Positive Workshop Environment

In-person workshops are one of the best times to articulated shared intentions around norms of behavior and codes of conduct (click [here](conduct.md) for details on crafting these). A code of conduct should be included as standard reference material within each workshop website (see below). Even for well-connected teams, beginning a meeting with a reminder about these foundational team elements helps create a welcoming environment where innovation can thrive. It also provides a mechanism for reporting violations to the code of conduct should these occur. Remember that each time the group gathers together, there may be new members attending, and it is especially important that they be made aware of the boundaries and social parameters of the collaborative space. Workshops can also be particularly stressful and challenging, so even if norms of behavior have been discussed already in remote settings, they should be revisited when meeting in person.

It is important to note that setting positive intentions around team conduct does not mean we expect or even wish to eliminate uncomfortable situations. A meeting in which all attendees are adhering to a strict code of conduct may have many uncomfortable moments, which are often markers of people taking brave steps to push their edges and address complex, difficult topics. 

### Strategic Planning

Workshops are often used to chart a course toward some collective collaborative goals. Commonly there will be unstructured group discussions with key ideas filtering up to the science team lead who makes the final decions on where the team will go next. A challenge with this approach is that discussions might be dominated by extrovers or senior scientists, and many of the ideas across other levels of the group are never given a chance to surface. Additionally, this approach doesn't foster the emergence of a collective wisdom that can, under the right conditions, lead to more innovative and high impact research than is possible when following individual ideas.

A good starting point for any strategic planning is to hear from the leadership team about their overall approach to collaboration. When leaders are transparent about their process and are willing to be vulnerable in exposing what they know and do not know, this can create a greater sense that "we are all in this together". People will be more likely to work in support of leadership goals and less fearful of sharing new ideas. 

One structure we have used in past workshops is the [Celebrity Interview](http://www.liberatingstructures.com/22-celebrity-interview/). Here the science team lead is invited into a conversation with a facilitator who asks questions that might be on everyone's mind. Questions might focus on learning more about that person's leadership style, hearing their viewpoint on key challenges for the team,  and learning more about how they will manage complexity and conflict (a sample list of questions is [here](files/HiMATWorkshopDay1Storyboard.pdf)). The participants are then offered an opportunity to follow up with clarifying questions.

[Ecocycle Planning](http://www.liberatingstructures.com/31-ecocycle-planning/) is another structure that enables us to explore the full range of existing activities within a team, identify obstacles and pinpoint opportunities for future growth. Other frameworks we have not tried but wish to explore because they appear to have considerable potential for scientific reserach include the [Cynefin Framework](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cynefin_framework) and [Future Backwards](https://cognitive-edge.com/methods/the-future-backwards/).

### Sharing New Research Findings

Sharing our latest work with our colleagues is a primary motivation for attending a workshop, and this is traditionally accomplished with a series of presentations from each investigator on the team. Presentations are notorious for consuming a substantial portion of a workshop agenda because they require enough time for everyone to get up and speak, and people often go beyond their allotted time. We are not against having presentations as long as everyone tries to adhere to some basic principles:

* **Give instructions in advance:** The meeting organizers should provide a brief framework outlining what topics they would like the presenters to cover, so that the content supports and enhances the overall purpose of the workshop. For example, if the primary purpose of a meeting is to build new collaborations, then each talk should dedicate at least a few minutes to explicitly identifying possible areas of cross-team exchanges. An example set of guidelines can be viewed [here](https://highmountainasia.github.io/first-meeting-website/customization/).

* **Keep it relevant:** Presentations consume precious attention from the entire team, so in preparing a presentation ask, "is this content potentially relevant to everyone?" if the answer is "no", then save the detailed content for later in the workshop when there are opportunities for smaller group exchanges. 

* **Keep it short, and take lots of breaks:** Research on adult learning shows that our ability to absorb information is limited and we will only retain a small handful of key concepts. Therefore talks should be kept short (under 10 minutes) and sessions should be broken up with opportunities to stand up and do other things. Never design a workshop that has hour after hour of talks with no other activities in between!

* **Save questions for later:** Question periods within or after a talk rarely achieve their intention of creating opportunities for collaboration and exchange of ideas. It is much better to have structured interactions that maximize the likelihood for as many people as possible to connect around ideas and results that surface in the presentations (see below).

* **Stick to the schedule:** Assign timekeeper duties to an administrative assist or the Project Manager. Explain to the group that everyone will be held to the time allotted, and se a countdown timer or small posters to tell people when their time is nearly up. It is the responsibility of presenters to fit their content into the time provided and to respect all the planning that goes into developing a detailed workshop schedule.

### Fostering cross-disciplinary flow of ideas

Presentations often bring new ideas to the surface, and there will be topics that call for additional follow-up. For example, one might wish to request access to a new research product presented by a particular research team. Often such exchanges end up being the most valuable part of any workshop, but they are usually left to happen during unstructured social time, such as during the lunch or coffee break. We advocate for putting specific, minimal structures in place that help maximize opportunitities for cross-team exchanges.

An effective substitute for question periods after a presentation is to invite the audience to record their questions on a form that has simple prompts such as "A possible topic we might address together is..." or "A way I could help you is..." (click [here](files/HiMAT Lightning Talk Worksheet.pdf) to view a sample form). The forms are then collected by the facilitator and distributed accordingly among teams who are given time to meet together and seek out connections and exchange ideas. Teams can also hold on to the forms they receive and use these as reminders to follow up with others when they return to their home institute.

### Navigating complex team decisions

Some of the most uncomfortable moments at workshops occur around topics such as [data sharing](data.md) and [attribution of effort](authorship.md). Nearly every researcher has experienced challenges in navigating these topics, and things can become particularly difficult in a large group with a diversity of perspectives. Nevertheless, in-person meetings are an ideal time to have courageous conversations, provided they are carefully facilitated.

One facilitation approach uses [TRIZ](http://www.liberatingstructures.com/21-design-storyboards/). Participants are invited to make a list of all the ways that the group could ensure they generate the worst possible result with respect to a given topic. Lists can be generated within small groups and then shared with everyone. Next, participants go down the list and assess whether any of their current ways of being in any way resemble items on the list. This allows people to generate a second list of counterprductive behaviors. Finally, teams review this second list and begin working on steps to eliminate these undesireable actions.

!!! note "HiMAT data sharing TRIZ"
    About mid-way through the HiMAT participants in a TRIZ activity were invited to explore "When it comes to sharing your data and the results of your work with each other and the external world what is the worst possible result?" Teams identified scenarios such as incorrect interpretation of model output variables, conveying the wrong advice to regional stakeholders, and generating massive inefficiences due incomplete metadata. From here, teams began to brainstorm on possible solutions, including the development of a team-wide data atlas to document the various modeling products, and the adherence to data sharing agreements when research use each other's products.

Another approach is to have small group discussions on using the [What, So What, Now What](http://www.liberatingstructures.com/9-what-so-what-now-what-w/) structure. The basic principle here is that conversations on difficult topics can often turn unproductive when people jump to conclusions. We minimize this by starting people off making a list of "just the facts", or the "What" of a specific topic. Next we ask of each item on this list "So What?" or "Why is this item important?". This stage generates meaning from the observations and helps people see things in a broader context. When this is complete, participants go through the list one last time and ask, "Now What?". Here we come up with specific actions, if any, that should follow from the obserations and meaning assigned to them. Note that in conventional conversations, many people jump into action (the "Now What" stage) without proceeding along this more structured "ladder of inference". 

!!! note "HiMAT authorship discussion"
    As the HiMAT was beginning to generate manuscripts with multiple authors we had a need to decide on authorship guidelines. In small groups, meeting participants were invited to explore "In your wider community, what have you noticed, observed, and experienced when it comes to how decisions get made about authorship: who is included, in what order, and who gets acknowledged or left out? What are the norms?" Next groups were invited to consider "So what, why are these norms important to notice as we publish our HiMAT results? So what, if anything, requires us to think differently about authorship and adapt?". Finally, groups considered "Now what ideas do you have for how we could address our potential authorship challenges?"

### Synthesizing major research findings


## Meeting Preparations

Advanced preparation on the part of meeting participants will allow for greater productivity during the workshop. A dedicated workshop webpage goes a long way in helping people know what to expect regarding scheduling, logistics and overall workshop content. Ideally the webpage should be a dynamic, working environment that can be built on and modified during the workshop. We recommend using GitHub or other easily modified web hosting environments for such a purpose.

!!! note "First HiMAT workshop website"
    The first HiMAT workshop required sharing of complex information across a new team. We built a [simple webpage](https://highmountainasia.github.io/first-meeting-website) that not only included agenda, travel and attendance information, but also details on team science goals and directions on how to prepare lightning talks. 


